8
Political Science as a Vocation.
A Personal Account1
It is not quite proper to talk about oneself. Perhaps, occasionally in
conversation, a memory, maybe even elaborated as an anecdote. But
to present an 'academic autobiography' in one's own lifetime? Memoirs
are written for one's grandchildren, and they do not read them anyway.
One might find some interest on the part of a daughter-in-law, curious
about the family into which she has married. Unfortunately I still do not
h a v e o n e .
On top of that there is the problem of my birthdate: 1923. I did not
choose it. Bitter, unsoftened memories - from my Dresden school class
one half did not return from the war, and from the same class in the
state Gymnasium, none. In what sort of mental state were those who at
the end of it all had, once more, survived? On 8 May 1945 I was 22, had
already completed my Abitur, and was legally an adult. Recently there
has been a discussion in the media about the absence of a great German
wartime novel, portraying the sufferings of the German people, men,
women and children in the bombed cities, in flight, in deportation. True
understanding of such events comes only from the novel in its classical
form, tracing the contours of contemporary consciousness, preserving
them, passing them on as memories. But there is no such novel and
should not be one, I can well do without it. Behind the suffering of the
Germans there lies another suffering which should reduce us - so thought
and think at any rate all those for whom I have any fellow-feeling - which
should reduce us to silence.
But a political scientist is more or less obliged to make political
judgements, it is part of the job; would his opinions on the Euro count
' Lecture given on 5 February 1998 within the series 'Related Experience', organised
as part of the Studium Generale programme at the University of Freiburg i. Br.
219
220 Politics as a Practical Science
for anything if he kept quiet about the years during which his capacity
to make such judgements developed, beginning his 'academic autobiog-
raphy with the great luck of his early release from imprisonment as a
PoW and registration for the winter semester of 1945-6 at the University
of Göttingen? To the extent that I can present an 'academic' biography,
have pursued the vocation of political scientist and am not spending this
winter in Florida as a pensioned-off rentier, that is all connected to my
experience of the period up to 8 May 1945. I also reflected a little on this
experience, in the limited way a young know-all can. You do not have to
love politics to become a political scientist. It is enough to think politics
serious and important, but that is quite obvious, and cannot explain
why one becomes a political scientist. It is also necessary to develop that
intellectual instrumentarium which facilitates a scientific understanding
of political affairs.
But how should I, a member of this troubled generation, talk about the
way in which I made the effort, during difficult times, to achieve some
measure of political judgement? One of my colleagues wryly summarised
the difficulty of such a task: 'If someone talks about how stupid he was,
that makes him look pretty stupid. But if someone suggests that he was
in fact not as stupid as the others, that also makes him look stupid.
The twentieth century was an especially senseless, not to say stupid,
century, a century in which the capacity for political judgement decayed
at an accelerating rate, a century in which statecraft was in steady decline
together with the art of war, the two being difficult to separate. The
sliding into the First World War, the failure to prevent the Second, and
the technical brutalisation of the conduct of war: Hiroshima, Dresden,
the Vietnam and the Gulf Wars - all these lend me little hope for the
dawn of better times.
So I will talk a little about my life, but let there be no false expectations:
I shall stick to the established German biographical tradition of stopping
as soon as things get interesting. Even Dichtung und Wahrheit breaks off
at the point where the young Goethe, some misunderstandings placed
behind him, sets out after all on the road to Weimar.
I
I am thankful for the circumstances of my birth. In the old town of
Hildesheim you learned to notice differences from the earliest years.
Once you were old enough to go to school the circle of playmates
divided: one group entered the Protestant school, the other the more
distant Catholic institution. With the transition to the upper school this
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 221
division continued: the Protestants went into the Andreanum or the
Scharnhorst school, while the Catholics went to the Josephinum on the
cathedral close. This cathedral close: opposite the cathedral porch there
stood an embodiment of a resolutely secular power: the Land courthouse.
I remember the cathedral priests, making their way to say mass across the
close from the chapter house, as being on the whole small and rounded;
the magistrates, counsel and judges from the courthouse, on the other
hand, as being rather taller. They certainly flew the black, white and
red flag. By the age of eight I knew in which streets black, red and gold
flags' were flown, and in which black, white and red. I was always a little
anxious when entering the Cathedral close - that was Catholic territory.
But if I had to take something to the Post Office the only way to avoid
it was to take the long way round by the Pfaffenstieg, and so I screwed
up my courage - and then of course just inside the gate to the left was
the Bishop's Palace, tranquil, unpretentious, for me the very idea of a
beautiful house, quite noble. The local government building was large
and ostentatious, with however an inscription which made the date of
the year of the three Kaisers, 1888, unforgettable:
Wilhelm the father of the empire,
Raised this house out of stone,
Friedrich the patient Prince
Raised pillar and wall.
Wilhelm completed the work
The solace and hope of his own,
That God protect Kaiser and house
With his ubiquitous hand.
That was as good as 'Drei, drei, drei - zu Issum Keilerei'.
Nonetheless, in Hildesheim one sensed history. Above all, the
impression of differences: of estate and class, large and small, major and
minor, bishopric and city, city and country. On market days the smell
of the country was in the air. I well remember the difference between
inflation and deflation. Partly I have it from stories, partly I saw it with
my own eyes: with inflation the money went, but afterwards, in 1923
and then again in 1948, things improved. With deflation, a shortage
of money, all become poor: poverty and despair follow, and it finishes
2 The colours of the Imperial Reich [KT).
3 The colours of the Weimar republic, and of course of the German republic today
[KT].
222 Politics as a Practical Science
with Hitler. I am not so sure that the protagonists of a 'strong' Euro have
really drawn the correct lesson from history: poverty brought with it
political radicalisation. There were now streets that should be avoided,
disturbances became an everyday event.
For me conscious political experience began on 30 January 1933. My
later thinking as a political scientist turns, like that of academic col-
leagues from my father's generation, on the question of how one can
maintain a halfway tolerable order, of how one can prevent a collapse
into systematic violence; it does not turn on the textbook antithesis of
pluralist democracy and totalitarianism. Those in power should of course
promote the general good; but they must above al protect the people
from harm.
The dispute over what attitude should be taken to the 'national
uprising' - for this is the way that the seizure of power was understood,
especially after Potsdam on 21 March, the day of the handshake between
the aged Field Marshall and the Corporal - this dispute also split families.
My father's decision to leave Germany for a while - no final departure
or emigration - was made on the day of the Reichstag fire, as his older
brother, staunchly nationalist, burst in upon us to confront my father
with the fact that 'his friends' had set the fire. My father was more inter-
ested in the arts than in politics, voted for the Democrats, perhaps once
for the Social Democrats. He could not stand the atmosphere any longer.
Three months later we landed in La Guayra, the harbour for the Vene-
zuelan capital Caracas, where my father was to undertake an interesting
but risky project. My grandfather had founded the first German nursery
specialising in orchids, he was quite at home anywhere in the world
where orchids could grow. My father had made several collecting trips
to Venezuela and Colombia on his behalf. (My nephew Thilo success-
fully continues the name 'Wilhelm Hennis, Hildesheim' into the fourth
generation.) The task given to my father was to make Venezuela an inde-
pendent producer of silk. This was a personal wish of the President, Juan
Vicente Gomez, one of the last of the line of great dictators in which
South American history is so extraordinarily rich.
For me the boyhood years between ten and fifteen represented a sud-
den break, leading into a period of unhurried political experience which
certainly left its mark upon me. From home, and that was Germany,
there came reports that things were improving, both economically and
politically. Sebastian Haffner has given an excellent account of public
opinion at that time. During the first two years in Venezuela I did not go
to school at all. Where we were, deep in the interior, in a small town on
the edge of the Llanos, the great plain, there was no school to which my
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 223
parents would have sent me. The schoolbooks that were sent by relatives
the gigantic tract of land that my father, quite miraculously, had trans-
were left mostly unread; from early morning until evening I was busy in
formed into a magnificent mulberry plantation. The land was close to a
smal spa to which Gomez, to relieve the infirmities of old age, retired for
a few weeks each year. My father was therefore a member of the extended
court of the tyrant, for Gomez has gone down in Venezuelan history as
the 'tyrant of the Andes'.
To women Gomez was charming, opponents he put in chains, to me
he was very nice. He cared tirelessly for his enormous family, 'Benemer-
ito', the 'meritorious', was part of his official title. The memoirs of an
old exiled Venezuelan of the time - one half of the intelligentsia was
in permanent exile, the other half enjoying the fleshpots and feeding
troughs of power - record that during the Christmas of 1935 he opened
his Paris newspaper to read 'father of 150 children dies', upon which
he knew immediately: Gomez is dead. Red-haired and freckled as I then
was, I also benefited from his love of children: my first efforts at riding
were made on one of his wonderful horses.
With the income from his then free-flowing oilfields Gomez built no
motorways, but he did build some decent roads. The country was free
of debt, and nobody overseas paid any attention to Gomez's style of
government. I learned then that there is nothing black and white in
constitutional questions; I have always been puzzled by the endeavours
of our development experts to teach the entire world democratic mores.
A democratic and constitutional state based upon the rule of law is a
marvellous, but very rare, cultural product, whose existence depends on
factors present only in a small part of the world, and even there these are
presently in decline. The economic impulse, the private urge for wealth
and glamour is much older than a politics dedicated to the common
good, and currently this very economic impulse is recovering the ground
which politics had so laboriously won from it over the last two hundred
years.
My father's workers were all Venezuelan, which means that their skin
colour shaded from white through brown to black. Simón Bolivar, the
Liberator, was also a mestizo; the tractor driver on the plantation was
black, he came from Trinidad, and only spoke the guttural English of his
home country: he taught me to drive the tractor and also introduced me
to my first words of English. The programme to make Venezuela an inde-
pendent silk producer did not last - the mulberry trees flourished, but the
silkworms, which formed a necessary intermediary between mulberry
leaf and silk, were unsuited to the damp tropical climate, and in the midst
224 Politics as a Practical Science
of a truly dreadful stench the entire ill-conceived project was ended.
Someone ought really to have checked on the suitability of silkworms
to a tropical climate. Since then I have always felt instinctively sceptical
of al projects, including the project of modernity. We moved house to
Caracas; there I could at last go to school. I went to the Colegio Aleman,
where many Venezuelans also sent their children. The lessons, drilled
into us by the classical Roman method, were given part in German, part
in Spanish, the former by excellent teachers sent from Germany, the
latter by local helpers. I still do not know which is the better teaching
method: the idealist liberal approach, which presumes that the child
wants to learn, or the Roman approach, which aims to break the child's
will and drum things in. At any rate, I could still today recite, without
too much trouble, the names of the constituent states of Venezuela from
Aragua to Zulia, together with their capitals, and also of course all the
Presidents from Paez, Guzman Blanco and down to Gomez. What the
German lessons were about I can no longer recall; but I was starting to
be a passionate reader. It was the years of the Spanish Civil War and the
Italian war of conquest in Abyssinia - the little emperor Haile Selassie was
the hero of the day. Early on I became an eager newspaper reader. Among
the schoolchildren there was no racial discrimination of any kind - there
were many children of Jewish emigrants, and the Venezuelans were all
café con leche, coffee with milk. Whatever might be wrong with the coun-
try, its people had the mastered the art of civilly getting along with each
other, certainly the most that one can hope of any multicultural polity.
But the German colony was divided. The fact that the Venezuelan gov-
ernment tolerated a 'Brown House', a residence for the local head of the
National Socialist Party, brought me for the first time into contact with
international law. The excellent director of the German school was fired
after pressure from the Party, he switched to dentistry and we remained
loyal to him in this new occupation. By this time I was fourteen, and for
me politics was everywhere. I had learned, felt, that it was something
quite different from private, domestic politics; that it moved according
to its own, much rougher, rules.
There was no educational path beyond the eight classes of the German
school in Venezuela; I had to return to Germany. I did the rounds of a
variety of boarding schools, but there was always something missing
from my background, Latin or Greek, French or maths - I did not fit into
any of the schools. My good father was in no hurry - in the summer of
1938 we made a lengthy tour of Italy. I established a basic knowledge of
Italian: 'strada interotta, pericolo in corso, crédere-combattere-vincere' -
believe, fight, win! Phrasemongering had caught on here too. In Rapallo
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 225
we stayed for a few days in a pension belonging to Jewish emigrés, who
had moved there in the hope of being able to stay. In five short years
Germany had changed completely. The régime was quite secure - there
did not seem to be anyone who questioned it. Finally a school was found
for me, a high school in with a senior boarding school in Dresden. I am
eternally grateful to the chance that brought me to this school and this
city. Dresden glittered, it was a musical city and Karl Böhm was at the
peak of his powers as director of the Opera; I discovered the state library
in the Japanese Palace; I had grown out of Karl May, and with a little
vigilance, this specifically Saxon attribute, it was not hard to evade the
intrusions of those times through inner retreat.
It is difficult to explain to young people today how one could escape
such intrusions without doing harm to one's soul. In principle there were
two ways: by simulating a maturity one did not actually possess, or by
gaining a genuine early maturity. In practice, this meant indulging in
the typical excesses of late puberty: the model here was that of 'Stenz',
the young ruffian from the UFA film Allotria. I opted for the other path:
I had been enraptured by the Divine Comedy. I breathed in worldly wis-
dom, I read Fritz Schalk's edition of the French moralists, Schopenhauer's
Aphorisms of Moral Wisdom, Gracián's Oracle, I filled myself with worldly
wisdom, thought myself infinitely learned and superior.
Jacob Burkhardt's World Historical Observations made a deep impres-
sion, the book was given to me in 1938 as a leaving present for boarding
school. His doctrine of the three dominions: state, religion and culture,
their shifting mutual interdependence, an early introduction to the dis-
criminating diagnostic approach of political studies, opened my eyes as
no other book had. I existed upon a level of abstraction so high that the
pettiness of 'duty', of 'mustering', of the 'Jungvolk Troop' passed me by
completely. During the winter semester of 1991-2, teaching at Jena, one
of the best times of my academic life, I found that young people in the
GDR had behaved much as I did: they either listened to Western music
and partied; or instead of Marx went straight to Hegel. It was mostly
the first sort that left for the West via Hungary in August 1989. As ever,
politics is based more on the passions than on reason.
The school gave me little trouble, in those subjects that did not interest
me I did the minimum; but what did interest me, reading and every
sort of art, that I did for myself. Besides, I learned in Dresden to hear what
teachers said only indirectly, above all to read between the lines, and that
in political questions it is not just a matter of values, but that intelligence
counts for a great deal. It became second nature to me that one should
not be easily fooled, should think for oneself, should inform oneself.
226 Politics as a Practical Science
Nothing exposed me to danger more often than the almost irrepressible
temptation to listen to so-called 'enemy broadcasts' on the radio. Our
maths teacher, Professor Vogel, 'Piep', was touchingly solicitous, and
often I had said to me, 'Hennis, they really can't be so stupid as not to
have tumbled to that'. In that I also heard: 'Surely this people cannot be
so stupid as to go along with all this nonsense and cause me so much
trouble just in getting through this syllabus! From this wonderful man
I learned that in certain political situations following one's official duty
is difficult. Vogel took the task set him, to teach us something, more ser-
iously than the circumstances under which he had to fulfil this task. The
teaching staff of the Fletcher School dated mainly from before 1933, to
which had been added a few resolute young Party members. In principle,
beneath a contemporary veneer, the spirit of sober, earnest Saxon ration-
ality prevailed; every one of my schoolmates who survived remembers
this school with gratitude.
In recent years few books has stirred me in the way that Viktor Klem-
perer's diaries have - for almost four years, from 1938 to 1942, I lived
in the same city, but what did I know about what really went on? It
wasn't really the premiere of a new opera from Richard Strauss which
deserved attention. I kept my mouth shut, but I kept my eyes open and
did not want to forget anything - no great credit to me, it was more
of an acquired talent that had become second nature. I also kept my
ears open; and I can still hear the awful racket of Kristallnacht. We had
been swimming in Güntzschen Bad. On the way back to the school, it
was already dark, we heard the terrible noise coming from the Prager
Straße, but no fire or police sirens. The worst was to know that some-
thing appalling was happening, without the possibility of being able to
ask what was happening. I have followed up, so far as I could, those of
my schoolmates who suddenly left without explanation. An especially
witty classmate, a precocious man of the world, suddenly disappeared.
A little later I saw him in Kaufmann's bookshop on the Seestraße, and
on one of the following weekends we met in the Café Hülfert on the
Prager Straße. 'Much' told me, after repeated reassurance, that it was
better for him to leave the school. He would not have been allowed
to take his Abitur. When I reminded him of the story a few years ago
he could not believe that he had told anyone about his 'fault', as it
was then said. But he did. I felt that to be a greater honour than the
most elevated national distinction. I can also not forget my great con-
cern a few days before my Abitur, in March 1942, when a blonde beauty
whom I adored was suddenly debarred. Eva Pick was the grand-daughter
of the old lady who Klemperer reports as having killed herself in the
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 227
Jewish House. From an interview with Hildegard Hamm-Brücher I con-
cluded than Eva must have been her cousin. How pleased I was when
I heard that Eva, who quite certainly never noticed me, lives happily
in the United States, surrounded by children and the children of her
children.
II
Among my fellow students after 1945 it was a strict rule that no-one
bothered anyone with their war stories. I will confine myself to the polit-
ical education that my three and a half years in the navy brought with
them, and which I certainly had to pass through before I could take up
a career as a political scientist. I can't leave this part out. If I have to
account for my experience, then it belongs here.
Early in 1942 the navy called up recruits born in the year 1923 suitable
for officer training. At the end of the basic training at Stralsund - due
to a lack of caution the corners were knocked off me in a particularly
sadistic manner, since which time I have been relatively indifferent to
physical stress - the entire training battalion of fresh young cadets stood
on the parade ground and we were posted, clockwise, to the various sta-
tions of Greater Germany's forces sited along the European coast, from
A to Z: starting in Kiel, via Denmark and Norway up to the North Cape,
then down the Volga to Odessa, and the Crimea. With 'F as in Fritz, G
as in Gustav, H as in Hans' we were in the Aegean, the coastal protec-
tion flotilla in Saloniki, then finally 'H as in Hennis': coastal protection
flotilla, Crete. Oh, My Hyperion! I had always loved geography. We had
an excellent geography teacher, and it was obvious to anyone who took
a look at the map of Europe that the Greater German Empire was show-
ing signs of strain. I had read Mahan, Kjellén and Haushofer. Of course
it is possible to overestimate the importance of geography to politics -
no factor is proof against overestimation. But to completely eliminate
geography, in the form of Geopolitics, from the canon of permitted per-
spectives in political science - this deliberate exclusion on the part of
German political science has during the last fifty years led us further
astray than the twelve short years ever did.
Anyone who knows Crete was certainly in the old capital of Haniá,
and remembers the great figure of Christ on the Akrotiri Peninisula with
the Venizelos Monument. A few paces away from there, commanding
a view over Haniá, the gulf, the White Mountains to the south and the
Aegean Sea to the north, strategic planning had in its wisdom decreed
that a battery be sited. The guns were from the former liner Schleswig
228 Politics as a Practical Science
Holstein, a ship that I remembered well from its visit to the Venezuelan
port of Puerto Cabello. The old tub was broken up after its action before
the Danzig Westerplatte - the first gunshots of the Second World War -
and the guns had been transported right across Europe, over the Aegean
to their place beside the figure of Christ blessing the port of Haniá, where
they were supposed to prevent an attempted enemy landing. 'For half of
his life a soldier waits in vain. We never fired a shot, apart from a few
practice rounds aimed at a target towed by a tug which we almost hit
instead. Down there, amidst the dazzling beauty of the Aegean, I quietly
came to terms with the consequences of political hubris, and the damage
that a lack of military judgement can do.
After Christmas I went via Athens to Glückstadt an der Elbe for a
course - I can no longer remember how many courses I had to attend
on the path to becoming an expert and fully trained U-boat officer. Our
small group - our names all began with H, Heuser, Hengesbach, Herget
and so on - arrived three days late, the journey had taken so long through
the bitter cold of the Balkans, mostly under the control of partisans.
Bridges had been demolished, the locomotives froze up, we survived by
exchanging military bread first of all for ouzo, and then as we moved
northwards for slivovitz. Perhaps I should add here that in May 1940,
after the occupation of Paris, I had briefly believed in the possibility of
a German victory. But really, recalling the large amount of pink on the
world map, I never believed in a German victory; certainly since the occu-
pation of Norway - why on earth were we there? It was not us, but our
opponent who determined the course of events, as a sea power prevails
over a power based on land. After the senseless Balkan campaign in early
1941, the assistance to the Italians in North Africa, all initiative was lost.
Tobruk was captured while I was a recruit in Stralsund, but Alexandria
remained in the far distance, there was no progress in front of Leningrad
and Moscow. The deterioration in generalship, to which young men
had already been sacrificed before Verdun and at the Somme, was
continued at Stalingrad. A dark foreboding spread among the young
midshipmen at Glückstadt; since Glückstadt there was really always a
friend with whom one could speak openly.
The next posting completed my apprenticeship in military policy: the
22nd Submarine Destroyer (UJ) Flotilla, stationed at Marseilles to begin
with. While refitting I discovered that most of the dockworkers were
refugees from Franco and I was able to practise my Spanish. Finally our
ship was as ready as a converted fishing boat equipped with asic and
depth charges can be; we were charged, together with proper Italian
warships, stylish corvettes and frigates, with protecting convoys bound
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 229
for Sicily and Libya (then later just Sardinia and Corsica) from aerial and
submarine attack. The first shock was the absolute command of the air
that the Allies had achieved. It was beyond belief: the Italians and then
we, as their German auxiliaries, had sought to dominate the mare Nostro;
within three years we had nearly reached Alexandria, although Malta
had not been dealt with. Two days before the Allies entered Palermo
UJ 2212 was torpedoed by a plane flying out of Malta. I was rescued,
flown from Palermo to Naples, got the obligatory home leave and had
to walk through the middle of Rome with my heavy kitbag, for there
was then no central railway station connecting the south station, where
I had arrived from Naples, to the one in the north of the city. The city
was in uproar. The Fascist Council, followed by the King, had deposed
Mussolini the day before. In Caracas, after the death of Gomez during
the Christmas of 1935, I had already seen how savage a desperate and
temperamental people can be. I am a decided proponent of representa-
tive democracy, understood as a form of rule in which the people, as
an electorate, chooses the most reasonable possible available leadership,
which is in turn constrained by the law and by the constitution. The
people of Caracas and the otherwise amiable Romans in late July 1943
filled me with horror. I was at any rate relieved that I escaped unscathed
from the people of Rome. Not, however, without some envy of their
having a leadership prepared to end a senseless war.
Six weeks later the Italians abandoned the war definitively. The events
in which I became entangled during 8 and 9 September 1943 completed
my political apprenticeship. It became clear to me that, if I survived,
I did not want to pursue that kind of hedonistic existence that Hyperion
ascribed to the Germans, but rather one that could be publicly justi-
fied. I have not time here to talk about my Corsican adventure, but
it ended in Bastia harbour, after a senseless massacre during the night
of 8 September, with an Italian frigate sinking our ten small German
ships, one after the other. The frigate's commander - Count Feccio di
Cossato, a bearded giant of a man, who had been a submarine com-
mander and wore the German iron cross - was perfectly right to do so,
for we had broken an agreement that I as translator had helped make.
I was rescued, together with a few other fortunates, by the very same
frigate that had sunk us on the evening of 9 September, after a long day
spent drifting in a dinghy far out from the Corsican coast. We spent
a few days cruising around the Tyrrhenian Sea before making port at
Portoferraraio, Elba, where a few stragglers from the Italian navy had
found refuge under the command of Prince Aimone of Savoy and the
King designate of Croatia. I had to report our pathetically small group
230 Politics as a Practical Science
of rescued sailors to the Admiral-Prince before being taken into captivity
in the fortress high above Portoferraraio with a wonderful view of the
island of Elba, a successor to a much greater personage. Two weeks later,
after the Prince's ships had sailed away to Sicily, I had to arrange and
translate the terms of capitulation between the Italian commander of
the island and the German occupation fleet - there were no German sol-
diers on Elba. I remember these days with a feeling of great disquiet. The
problem of giving advice, of responsible advocacy for this or that crucial
problem of policy has since then pursued me constantly. Whoever has
read Erich Kuby's book on the treatment of those Italian soldiers made
German prisoners after the Italian capitulation will know what I mean.
I was a not unenthusiastic soldier. I enjoyed learning how to run a boat.
I thought I looked very good in the uniform. There is no doubt that the
Wehrmacht was the tool of a criminal regime. That the Wehrmacht itself
was a criminal organisation is not something I could endorse, although
I would not say that among its leadership presumptiousness, conceit
with respect to other peoples, and an arrogant belief in racial superior-
ity were rare exceptions. But these are certainly not specifically military
vices. I have had excellent, so far as I could tell quite unpolitical, superior
officers, unpolitical in the sense that they were not very thoughtful.
After Elba it was a matter of survival - from course to course on the way
to becoming a qualified submarine officer. On the icy Easter Sunday of
1944 I went for a ducking the third time. Leaving harbour for exercises
near Pillau the tiny training submarine U2 was rammed by a fishing
boat. The submarine sank like a stone, only the five of us who had been
standing on the bridge were fished out of the ice-cold water at the last
moment. Semi-thawed-out I fell into a rage, good friends shut me up and
later claimed not to have heard anything. For the third time I had been
in the drink, and not taken to it as the charming wife of a colleague once
thought to correct me.
My training was finally complete in August 1944; we were all congratu-
lated by the Submarine Commander Admiral von Friedeburg. What for?
We were so badly trained that it would have been any experienced
submarine commander's nightmare to have been assigned such inexperi-
enced youths as officers of the watch. Luckily there were no submarines
to which we could have been posted. I was singled out for something
higher: I was posted as adjutant to a real admiral with three piston rings,
the commander of the Norwegian west coast stationed in Bergen. The
chief of personnel in Oslo warned me that if I did not get on with him it
was not necessarily my fault. The admiral accepted me with some reser-
vation. Never before had he been assigned a commoner, and not even
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 231
an officer's son. Because of his quaint ways my admiral was known in
the Navy by his nickname 'Icke (me)', from the Berlin dialect 'Icke, Icke'
(me! me!). When I presented myself to him he tried to find out more
about my family background. He was certainly no expert on orchids,
'Wilhelm Hennis, Hildesheim' meant nothing to him. So he asked what
sort of school I had gone to. When I explained what a continuation
school is, that it enables pupils who have left school without an Abitur to
get one, I sensed amazement. He had never heard of anything like that.
Disquiet kindled in him, and also in me. To his very direct question,
'Tell me, what sort of house do you come from?' I responded laconically,
'Admiral, my uncle lives downstairs and we live upstairs.' He clearly liked
that; for as I went out I heard him saying to my predecessor, Herr von
Martens: 'You know, Martens, I like this new Lieutenant. He is something
different. That is one of the people.'
The end of the war was not far off, I was careless, stumbled into a trap:
I respectfully declined the request that alongside my responsibilities as
an adjutant I assume those belonging to the vacant Party post. I was
immediately suspended from duty, placed under house arrest, but noth-
ing more happened beyond being posted to a submarine destroyer unit
in Stavanger, where a few weeks later I stood accused of actions prejudi-
cial to morale, a scapegoat for the derelictions of others. I became curious
about this a few years ago and looked up the background in the St Geor-
gen military archive. I was lucky once more, an older officer, a former
Berlin lawyer who was assigned to me as defence counsel, argued that the
accusation was unfounded and pleaded innocence. This was the verdict
of the court, but my Admiral exercised the prerogative of his superior
judicial position, and so at the end of the war my papers were lying in
the in-tray of the higher court in Oslo. For Prime Minister Filbinger* and
myself it was a real pleasure that we first met in the autumn of 1967,
when he invited me to Stuttgart following my appointment at Freiburg.
The war was over. By August I had already been released from captivity,
my journey from the last transit camp in Schleswig-Holstein through
4 Member of the Oslo court, later Prime Minister of Baden-Württemberg who
had to resign office in 1978 following disclosure of his judicial involvement in
the execution of a deserter and in authorising death sentences for two other
sailors. On 1 June 1945 he sentenced a naval 'deserter' to thirteen months'
imprisonment. He publicly defended his actions by saying 'Was damals Recht
war, kann heute nicht Unrecht sein!', referring to the 1872 Military Penal Code,
which rather confirmed his failure to understand the larger point.
232 Politics as a Practical Science
Hamburg and Hanover made absolutely plain where hubris and the polit-
ical stupidity of my own people had led. Hildesheim had gone up in
flames as late as March 1945, my parents' house was a pile of rubble
and ash. A few days later I was able to register as a student in Göttin-
gen, which had escaped destruction. It was a joy to be alive, from then
on I only looked forward; people of my age had neither inclination nor
time to reflect upon and accept the past. Twenty years later that made a
major difference with those five years younger: Habermas, Sontheimer,
Dahrendorf - rarely were so few years' difference in age linked to such
diverse generational experiences.
III
The period immediately preceding the end of the war was defined for me
by two key incidents: I wanted to study law, a subject most immediately
related to politics, and in any case I had already had one third of the
material, penal law and criminal procedure drummed into me in Sta-
vanger by a former advocate. Surely the remainder could be got up in no
time. But above all I wanted to read, and read about, Max Weber. During
the 'existential' tensions of the last few wartime months I experienced
a 'reading epiphany'. During my last home leave 1 took with me Karl
Jaspers' little book from 1932, the text whose title sounds today a little
high-flown: Max Weber. The German Spirit in Political Thought, Study and
Philosophising. There is a letter from Hannah Arendt in the Marbach Lit-
erary Archive in which she responds to Jaspers sending her a copy with
the blunt: 'What is that meant to mean? German spirit?' She had studied
philosophy with Jaspers. She was right.
But what gripped me about the little book was the person whose name
I did recognise. Since then Max Weber has been constantly with me; and
I think that the work I have done in recent years has put him back on
his feet once again. Out of the 'founder' of modern sociology and the
'methodologist' of the social sciences there emerges, at any rate for me,
the great, stimulating analyst of historical and political constellations,
of the 'interlinking of circumstance', of the most precise kind of judge-
ment. The question of the 'cultural problems' that modern capitalism
throws up, for politics and for the state, is in my opinion an issue whose
importance will only become clear during the next century and which
is his most important legacy for us.
S Max Weber. Deutsches Wesen im politischen Denken, in Forschen und Philosophieren.
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 233
I remember Göttingen with great gratitude. I studied the subject in
which I had to take examinations as soon as possible in exactly the same
way that I had done at school: selectively, doing the minimum neces-
sary where my attention was not caught, and where it was, doing it for
myself. I went to every lecture that was of any interest - history, litera-
ture, music - I had also got myself registered in the Philosophy faculty.
On the side I learned the essentials of another trade; even before Christ-
mas 1945 I was part of an independent venture, the foundation of the
Götinger Universitätszeitung, later the Deutsche Universitätszeitung, and up
to 1950 I was a member of the editorial board. I learned how to typeset,
how to 'strike' a page, and above all how to abbreviate to the required
length the writings of others, as well as my own. I have always had the
deepest respect for the constraints faced by newspaper producers - how
to make best use of the space. There always has to be space for the others.
Since I never complained about cuts I have always got on well with news-
paper editors. The Göttinger Universitätszeitung broke the taboo according
to which a professor with due regard for his reputation would not write
for a newspaper or a popular journal. All the major figures of the the
immediate post-war years gladly wrote for the GUZ; among students it
was in this forum that Hartmut von Hentig, Joachim Kaiser and many
others learned to write.
I was, together with friends drawn chiefly from Rudolf Smend's sem-
inar on the theory of the state, a member of the SDS, which was not at
that time a band of revolutionaries. Naturally I was also a member of the
student union ASTA. The leading figure among the students was Axel
von dem Bussche, revered as a man ready to give his life in an attempt
on Hitler's; while the beautiful and clever Maria von Wedemeyer, fiancée
of the executed Dietrich Bonhoeffer, was the adored heroine. The Göt-
tingen University Library almost fascinated me more than the lectures.
Its systematic catalogue in great leather-bound folios dating from the
1820s gave me an insight into the organisation of knowledge, for the
old library system did for the most part correspond with the Aristotelian
division of the sciences. For ten years I was bothered by the question
of why the older writings on public law in Göttingen were organised
in the way they were; even with Savigny public law was arranged not
under JUR or JUS, but under POL, Politica, which itself was placed
next to those holdings dealing with matters such as veterinary medicine
and silver mines in the Harz mountains, OEC for Oeconomica. From
my perplexity over the shelving practice of generations of Göttingen
librarians there grew my Habilitation dissertation, Politik und praktische
Philosophie.
234 Politics as a Practical Science
I began to think about a job: in the third semester I visited the library
director and asked about the chances of becoming a librarian. His advice
was to get on and finish my study of law first. I would have liked the
opportunity of being a successor to Valentiner, the great Curator of
Göttingen University. One of the most foolish mistakes of German
higher education policy has been the separation of financial and person-
nel administration from the purely academic functions of the university -
I only would have liked to have been a curator in the old style.
Smend was my doctoral supervisor and one of the most influential fig-
ures in university politics during those early post-war years; from him
you picked up the habit of thinking of the university as a political and
legal corporate body. I began to take a quiet interest in the daily life of
a truly learned professor: in the morning to the library, lectures from
ten to twelve, for the remainder a comfortable domestic existence at
Goldgraben 13, Smend's private address: supervisions and other meet-
ings conducted at home, but please do not ring between 2 and 3.30 in
the afternoon. 'Ordinary and Public Professor' - this was the old title -
could one have a freer and fuller life? Independent, answerable to no-
one else? What did I know then of fellow professors; but what was the
nature of this 'public' appointment? I considered this question for almost
two years. Smend told me to write my dissertation about it. I gained
my doctorate in 1951 with an extended seminar paper which I finished
off quickly in six weeks. In 1954 Smend published an essay 'The Prob-
lem of the Public Domain' with some introductory remarks which stated
that the essay should be read as 'a preparatory introduction to the ques-
tion, anticipating definitive work by others on a broader basis' - typical
Smend-speak - to which a note was appended, 'A contribution of this
kind is expected from W. Hennis ...'. I have fulfilled this expectation,
like so many others, only incompletely, but the old man knew how to
rouse expectations, and from that time it has been this question of the
public domain that has shaped my career.
Max Weber's 'Parliament and Government in a Reconstructed
Germany' of May 1918 has for me always been the model for situ-
ational political analysis: what are the historical factors which have
determined the situation, what set of problems did they create, what
were the tendencies for future developments, which direction should
such development take. I began to think that I might be capable of this
6 R. Smend, 'Zum Problem des Öffentlichen und der Öffentlichkeit', in Staat-
srechtliche Abhandlungen und andere Aufsätze (Berlin: Duncker + Humblot,
1954), p. 462.
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 235
sort of judgement after I had given a paper entitled 'Problems of a Future
Peace Treaty with Germany' to Herbert Kraus's seminar on international
law during the winter semester of 1948-9. Kraus had had contact with
the resistance, he had been tutor in international law for young attachés
in the German Foreign Office, Adam von Trott was one of his students
and during the Nuremberg Wilhelmstraße trial he was a prominent coun-
sel for the defence. Quite naturally he assumed that the existing state of
war could be ended only through a formal peace treaty. My paper rather
pulled the rug from under the feet of the seminar, for I demonstrated
briefly, but with relevant historical and sociological evidence, and with
the latest publications in international law cited in the footnotes - I had
taken part in a summer school in Oxford and browsed for many hours
among the latest, and very expensive, books in Blackwell's, taking notes
where I could - I showed that there would not be a peace treaty of a
traditional kind, and that if we did not wish to surrender the prospect of
reunification then such a peace treaty was far from desirable for Germany.
Kraus conceded the point, gave me a '1', and that was roughly the story
right up to the 2+4 Agreement.
I sat my Referendarexamen in Autumn 1949 at the Celle Oberlandes-
gericht, and as is usual for students I wanted to complete my doctorate
as quickly as possible; my still unpublished dissertation 'The Problem
of Sovereignty' carried the subtitle 'Contribution to the Contemporary
Condition and Literature of Political Science'. I did not want to sit for
the second state examination and become a legal Assessor. Smend and
Franz Wieacker, the teachers for whom I had the most respect, were
not really 'proper lawyers, for neither had gone on to take the second
examination. Did I want to become a 'proper' lawyer? The placement
prescribed by the examination was at the local Hildesheim court, right
next door to the prison, I found the idea repellent and tedious, war had
robbed me of four years and I thought that I could do something bet-
ter with my time. I have always maintained a distance with respect to
practical politics, understood as what politicians do. I am really rather
proud of the fact that among all my professorial appointments none has
been made by a Minister of Education with whom at the time I shared
a party political allegiance. A political scientist should not feel drawn to
politics. 'Politics' was originally a form of knowledge, like ethics, math-
ematics or physics; from antiquity right up to the middle of the previous
century it was also regarded as the queen of all the sciences, it concerned
itself with knowledge of that most important matter for the citizen, the
good order of the commonweal. I was attracted by this science, but it
still did not exist. I had read the great texts - Plato, Aristotle, Hobbes,
236 Politics as a Practical Science
Kant and Rousseau - for the most part while still a schoolboy. When
I think back on the lecture courses that directed me towards this new
discipline I naturally think first of Smend, but also of the fabulous lec-
tures on the 'History of International Law' which Wilhelm Grewe gave,
our emeritus professor, and later ambassador. However much I deliber-
ately set myself apart from politics as a vocation, I still wanted to form
a direct impression of it. Daily political life had already begun in Bonn,
I really wanted to experience it at first hand, and also had an idea of the
particular perspective that I might find.
IV
This more or less brings me to the second book of my 'narrated experi-
ences' - you need not worry, there are only two. Instead of taking up
a legal placement, I made an application to the 131 SPD deputies of
the first Bundestag, listing my abilities: a good mark in the state exam-
ination, Dr. jur., driving licence Group 4 (I had just got this), typing,
linguistic skills. At that time there was no position of assistant either
with the individual deputies or with the parliamentary party's office;
I was the first, now there are several thousand. I was employed by the
parliamentary party, assigned to Adolf Arndt, legal adviser to the party.
It was clear from the beginning that Arndt, later the 'crown jurist' of the
SPD, would need help and that with him I would complete a second,
and entirely unique, legal apprenticeship. The Constitutional Court was
about to begin its deliberations and the opposition in the Bundestag
intended to force a review of Adenauer's policy towards the west and to
rearmament. Apart from that Arndt was one of Kurt Schumacher's most
trusted colleagues, and their two offices were connected by an anteroom.
In no time I knew everyone in Bonn, at any rate as viewed from the Bun-
destag, particularly from the perspective of the opposition. Apart from
helping Arndt draft papers for the Constitutional Court I looked after
the greater part of his constituency correspondence; every four weeks
we went back to his sociologically extremely interesting constituency
'Rotenburg/Fulda, Hersfeld, Hünfeld'; I also made sure that Arndt was
mentioned every few days in the local newspapers. In this way I trained
my judgement in matters political. I also got a sense of the temptations
that arise from participating in power. My working space in Arndt's tiny
office consisted of a desk, but I had no key to the left-hand drawers.
One day I was required to leave the room, and later two men who were
obviously court officials left the room with a pile of confiscated files. The
clerk responsible for duplicating secret cabinet proceedings had always
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 237
made two extra copies: one set was sold for good money to the French
Deuxième Bureau, and to ease his conscience the other was given to
Comrade Schumacher. There was a big scandal, Schumacher found the
whole affair excruciating, the trial was struck out, and I was left with
a bad taste in my mouth. An understanding that gossip and hearsay -
including of course that of opinion research, for what are public opin-
ion surveys based on if not upon gossip - my understanding that these
things do not deserve much attention is something that comes from my
time in Bonn.
I was quickly convinced that Adenauer's foreign policy was the right
one, but with every respect for the dreadful twelve years that Schumacher
had spent in a concentration camp, the man was a calamity for the SPD;
Godesberg came ten years too late. The cases brought by the SPD relat-
ing to foreign powers - the Schumann Plan, the European Union, the
Kehler Harbour Agreement - none of them had any direct result, but
they were nonetheless constitutionally very significant. The Constitu-
tional Court took advantage of these highly political cases to establish
its position within the new constitutional framework, the position of
parliament and government was clarified with respect to the meshing
of public and international law - and this held firm until the quite irre-
sponsible rearrangement of these matters in the new article 23 of the
Basic Law.
The proceedings which I helped prepare were not all lost, otherwise
it could be said that it is a good thing I never became a lawyer. Per-
haps the most important and consequential judgement handed down by
the Constitutional Court in almost fifty years, the so-called Lüth judge-
ment, was won by the plaintiff, whose case I worked on quite alone, apart
from a few forensic additions from Arndt, and Lüth himself rewarded my
labour very generously. I was really no more than an intermediary; Lüth's
complaint concerned the issue of whether one might protest over the
screening of films by the director of Jud Süß, Veit Harlan, and I adopted
the argument advanced in Smend's 'Right of Free Expression of Opin-
ion', as developed before the 1927 Conference of Public Lawyers. Lüth,
having lost his case in every Hamburg court, had to come to Arndt to
ask for help, Arnt gave me the case and I knew my Smend. I played my
part in the causal chain of events leading up to this judgement of quite
fundamental significance for the structure of our Basic Law, whereby the
German authoritarian state (which included the right of boycott) was
annulled by a legal judgement.
Only once more did I become involved in playing the part of the
learned jurist; I view Paragraph 9a of the Atomic Law, which deals with
238 Politics as a Practical Science
the disposal of nuclear waste, as a violation of the Basic Law, since it
is not possible to dispose of the waste in a manner suitably responsible
towards future generations. This is neither physically possible, nor is it
futurologically possible (assuming that this is the antonym of historical),
for we cannot compel in any way our distant heirs to recall quite what the
content of a disposal site might be. In my opinion the so-called peaceful
use of atomic energy is unworthy of a free society. I would gladly be a
link in the chain of those who seek, peacefully and legally, within the
terms of the Basic Law, to prevent the peaceful development of atomic
energy. The possibility is still open.
There was a great temptation to use the position with Arndt and help
from the SPD to make rapid headway as a career politician, but I did
not want that at all, I wanted to have my own professional base and
to be as free and independent as possible. In the summer of 1952 I was
invited to take part in the Harvard International Seminar, organised by
the young Henry Kissinger, also born in 1923. At that time Kissinger was
working on his dissertation on Metternich and Bismarck. Together with
Klaus Epstein, we three concluded that it was not the ideology and totali-
tarianism of this century that bore chief responsibility for the misery of
our times, but instead the decline of statecraft. The Harvard seminar to
which Kissinger invited young academics, politicians and artists, always
twenty Europeans and twenty Asians, was a natural progression from the
Salzburg Seminar in American Studies that I took part in twice during
1950. In Salzburg and then during the weeks at Harvard I took a quick
course in modern, principally American, political science. I burrowed
among the holdings of the Widener Library as I had done in the Göttin-
gen University Library - political science really had a hold on me now.
I studied the Federalist Papers, Walter Bagehot, Tocqueville; the Ancients
attracted me more than the Moderns. Time was too short to take it all
in. Otto Kirchheimer, a student of Carl Schmitt who left Germany in
1933, had smuggled me into an exchange programme. I mention him
because in many respects 1 regard him as my real teacher in political
science. At the time I was visiting Harvard he was working in the State
Department, and so he put me in a visitors' programme. I was able to
remain four months longer in the United States and got to know all the
important departments of political science. That was not re-education,
but rather American generosity. I learned this and that from American
political science - it was beginning to become frightfully 'scientific' in
its 'approaches' - but above all I got to know a functioning democracy.
I found more interesting those exiles who had mutated into 'political
scientists' without losing their German intellectual foundations: Leo
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 239
Strauss, whose Natural Rights and History had just appeared, also Eric
Vogelin. I kept closely in touch with both of them. In 1962 Vogelin
tried to persuade me to take on the second chair in Munich, but I wanted
first to go to Hamburg as a junior colleague of Siegfried Landshut, and
then in Hamburg Wolfgang Wieland and I opened up the possibility of
Strauss returning to Hamburg, where he had originally taken his doc-
torate with Cassirer. When he did not find the idea tempting enough -
and who could blame him - he did at least accept an honorary doctorate
from Hamburg. Leo Strauss prevented me from pursuing a purely 'empir-
ical' political science, or conceiving political science as the handmaiden
of political education, of democracy, or whatever. Socrates stands at the
origin of political philosophy, asking how we are to lead our lives - not
just in conformity with the prevailing laws, current opinions and con-
ventions, but demanding that the way we lead our lives must be justified
by reason, truth and philosophy. A political science in which a spark of
philosophical reflection is not constantly present, risking contradiction
of the prevailing order, is in my opinion not worth a fig.
During the last few weeks of my American trip I attended Franz Neu-
mann's seminar on Montesquieu, experienced at Columbia University
the first great boom of opinion research - for the electoral campaign
between Stevenson and Eisenhower boosted opinion polling, and this
branch of the service industry which was proffering itself as a new sci-
ence. I published my first independent little monograph in 1957, on
Opinion Research and Representative Democracy, using my old index cards
on 'public opinion'.
In Washington I gained an insight into serious political life; suddenly
my opinion as an expert was sought and I did the round of the offices. The
European Defence Union, which was eventually to founder because of
French opposition, threatened to collapse in the autumn of 1952 because
of a case then before the German Constitutional Court that I had helped
cook up. In Germany there was something like a genuine constitutional
crisis: the SPD had brought an action in the first, allegedly 'red', court
senate, to which (1 simplify) the government responded by seeking a
judgement from the second, 'black', senate that the SPD was not cap-
able of bringing such an action. As Federal President Heuß would have
had to sign the ratification protocol, so he requested an opinion from
the court sitting in plenary session. Hardly anyone in Germany under-
stood this legal wrangle, and certainly no-one at all in Washington; but
there was someone there who could perhaps shed some light on matters.
Kirchheimer dragged me from one department to the next, including one
unforgettable meeting with Felix Frankfurter, the grand old man of the
240 Politics as a Practical Science
Supreme Court and a solid supporter of Roosevelt's New Deal legislation.
The gracious old man received me in an office built on Renaissance pro-
portions, just like a painting by Titian: 'Come in young man, have a
seat und nun erklären Sie mir doch, was ihr verrückten Deutschen da
schon wieder ausheckt.' From Dorothy Fosdick, number two in George
Kennan's planning staff, I got in exchange for my explanation of the
subtleties of German constitutional issues a lecture on the conduct of
high politics. The Stalin note of March 1952 had reduced German pol-
itics to disarray; the SPD and the FDP wanted to know whether Stalin's
offer of reunification was serious or not. Adenauer thought, quite rightly,
that it was a treacherous manoeuvre on the part of the 'Zoffjets' aimed
at disrupting rearmament. I met George Kennan, the originator of con-
tainment policy, two years later in Frankfurt; he is the most impressive
personality, the most venerable person, the greatest politics teacher I
have ever met. Dorothy Fosdick convinced me that Adenauer was right.
I reported my impressions regularly to Arndt, and perhaps these letters
played a part in Carlo Schmid's offer that I take up the post of Research
Assistant i n his Frankfurt Seminar for Political Science with effect from 15
March 1953. Eureka! If this subject had a university chair, then I could
present myself there for Habilitation. 'Political Science as a Vocation'
began to take shape.
Meanwhile I had finally realised why in Göttingen the Politica vol-
umes were shelved alongside books on equine distemper and the proper
management of farmhands. Politics, like economy, related to the doc-
trine of the classical household; Otto Brunner's Adeliges Landleben und
europäischer Geist helped me to understand the context. From the time
of Aristotle politics was a discipline of practical philosophy, hence a prac-
tical science, dealing with human action in the political domain. It was
now clear to me what I so much disliked about the new political science
and its weakness for 'theoretical' fashion, and I also acquired a histor-
ical understanding of this development from its beginnings in Hobbes'
ambition to reconstruct politics as a geometric science. I could not object
any longer to David Hume's essay 'That Politics be Reduced to a Science',
but this was a particular form of science, a practical science, that was
and is relevant for politics. The history of political science was revealed
to me, from its Aristotelian foundation, its singularly topological form of
argument sustained right up to Max Weber's anthropo-characterological
7 'Now tell me what you crazy Germans have been getting up to [KT].
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 241
problematic, it is this particular apprehension of the nature of political
science that has defined my position ever since.
In lectures and seminars I first taught the subject matter of political
science as an analysis of government, treating the material didactically
and systematically; later I shifted my attention in research and teaching
to the problem of governability, the difficulty of retaining governmen-
tal control under modern democratic conditions. I have always been
attracted by the great texts: Machiavelli, the Federalist Papers, Rousseau,
Toqueville - and again and again the figure closest to us, the last real clas-
sical political thinker: Max Weber. The cultivation of a careful, respectful
but also critical reading of such a great writer has been a constant chal-
lenge, for my own work and as a teacher. I have never been as impressed
as their proponents have been with those 'theories' that have flourished
in my discipline, be they critical, system-theoretical or communica-
tive. I first became aware of newer German diversions and cul-de-sacs
in Frankfurt; I steered clear of the Institute for Social Research.
I completed my Habilitation in June 1960; I was admitted to 'political
science', pure and simple. The public lecture that I gave as part of my
Habilitation dealt with 'The Idea of "Office" and the Concept of Democ-
racy'. In a democracy the process of opinion formation must be reflected
in the legally accountable public offices of parliament and government.
The same is true of the academic position which we as university teach-
ers maintain through research and teaching. And this brings me to the
close of my account.
V
If political science has become my vocation, then I have spent my entire
career within a university framework, teaching in six universities and
eight faculties. At the beginning of the 1950s Hermann Heimpel consid-
ered that the German university was fundamentally sound. That was not
my experience as a student. That a law student who wants to get good
examination grades has need of private coaching was and is a scandal.
The Blue Report of 1948 was the first significant account of the condition
of the German university, and in the Göttinger Universitätszeitung I played
my part in promoting discussion of it. I carried on writing and argu-
ing right up to 1975, the year of the unhappy and deplorable Higher
Education Law. But it was in that year that close involvement in the
policy-making process forced me to recognise that university issues were,
for most politicians and right across the party spectrum, simply objects
to be deployed in the give and take of political horse-trading - and so
242 Politics as a Practical Science
I discontinued my efforts in this political domain. When things have
been bad I have retreated to my seminar office, where there was always a
harmonious and friendly atmosphere. There I could console myself with
the thought that even the nooks and crannies of my little office in Col-
lege Building IV were designed by that great architect Karl Schäfer, the
father-in-law of one of Max Weber's sisters.
I am afraid that the university is dying - that core idea of a university, its
guiding principle, not those diverse functions that have been gradually
added to it. The university is on its deathbed, but does not know it, does
not wish to know it. Those who bear responsibility, both politicians and
spokesmen for a university stubbornly insisting on its autonomy, are not
interested in hearing about this sickness; anyone who tries to tell them
about it has no chance of being heard. I am shocked to have to admit that
I am not interested in the university any more. Science and scholarship,
of course; and also naturally the students, but I am really sorry for them
since they have so little idea just how badly the modern university serves
them. The stones of this fine building are patient; and up there it is still
written 'Truth will make you free'. This is not just an allusion to the
Gospel of St John, it is also the teaching of Socratic philosophy and in
its wake all genuine, enlightening and hence liberating scholarship.
I am happy to admit that I really loved the old university. To be a
member of a significant faculty was a matter of pride and stimulation.
Ever since the old faculties, as scholarly corporations, were split up into
administrative units I have lacked the sense of belonging that I had in
the old university. The traditional sources of enthusiasm, certainly the
finest of human qualities - belief in God, patriotism, the love of country -
these are for the most part long gone. The university has likewise lost the
capacity to arouse a sense of allegiance. But we do have one thing left:
science and scholarship, an enterprise defined not in a utilitarian or a
positivist fashion but as a philosophically rooted and therefore liber-
ating endeavour. I still love science and scholarship. I am in complete
agreement with my Weber when he says that that nothing is of any value
for man that is not done with a passion - with due regard naturally for
a necessary degree of sobriety and moderation, for passion is otherwise
just sheer exuberance, and sorrow too has its part of passion. The first
part of my story is about that. The modern university is alien to me and
I am afraid that the prospects for a liberating truth there are meagre.
Of course there must remain something of the original idea, that spirit
which consecrates and justifies the institution, in its irreducible form,
its constitution, organisation and faculties, even in its buildings. How
much I loved Göttingen University and its old lecture hall. What a bonus
Political Science as a Vocation. A Personal Account 243
that Smend's seminar on the theory of the state met in the Sekretariat of
the Academy! How enchanting it was to work in the Jugenstil buildings of
Hamburg University. But I shall try in conclusion to return to the point
of the topic that Smend gave me to study.
The title of a full professor used to be 'ordentlicher und öffentlicher Pro-
fessor'. That a professor 'professes' something is a myth which still does
the rounds. But what is 'public' about the work of a professor? And what
is private about a Privatdozent? In fact these titles embody that specif-
ically German cultural tradition that has defined the German university,
with which it will live or die. Since the Thirty Years' War Germany was
always a poor country and we have never had universities that have
benefited from private endowments or their own property. Besides the
Church, only the state was in a position to found, maintain and finan-
cially support them. And the state needed them: the First Faculty training
trustworthy clergy, the Second Faculty a judiciary competent in the law,
and the Third Faculty reliable doctors. (And how grateful I am for the
skill, care and friendship of my colleagues in the medical faculty). The
Fourth Philosophical Faculty had up to the time of Kant and Humboldt
only a generally preparatory function, and Humboldt himself is only an
important stage in the history of the German university, for its foun-
dations are much older and more prosaic. Public professors were those
to whom the state had entrusted a public office, the representation of
their discipline. They were in fact also known as disciplinary represen-
tatives (Fachvertreter). The juniors, the Privatdozenten, were appointed to
teach by the faculty, not the state - they did not therefore hold public
office, nor did they have to represent the entire discipline. Even the Wil-
helminian era is distinguished by cultural and scholarly achievements,
which were essentially political achievements predicated upon those of
the states. And the Weimar Republic understood itself as a state of school-
ing and culture. It was only through its culture that this country was able
to recover and develop. Hence the education of children in schools and
the more adult youth in universities was a public task of especial import-
ance. The present-day state knows nothing of that and the university has
itself completely forgotten it. For three decades the same slogans have
been relentlessly deployed: better management and new organisational
structures.
The one and only meaningful reform of the modern university is one
that starts out from an idea, not from an organisational question; an
idea that is something more than the sum of the social functions that
the university, naturally enough, also has to fulfil. Humboldt might well
be passé, but what comes next? One document after the other, each as
244 Politics as a Practical Science
uninteresting and uninspiring as the last. To be quite honest: I have no
hope for the German university and that is, for me, a bitter acknowledge-
ment at the conclusion of a professional career. I can see no alternative
that could be proffered to those for whom it exists: the students.
The intellect is a spirit which probes and delves. If there is no place
for it in the university it will simply create a new space for itself.
I am at any rate quite sure that there will always be young people for
whom the most important thing is to live in this spirit, at the bidding
of no-one. I wish I had thought up the title of Gerhard Krüger's wonder-
ful book on Plato, Understanding and Passion. Perhaps he thought of it
in this room. I hope that younger people will rediscover understanding
and passion for themselves.
